openSUSE 13.1 Release Notes

Version: 13.1.10 (2014-01-08)

Copyright © 2013 SUSE LLC

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the
license is included as the fdl.txt file.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Miscellaneous
2. Installation

    2.1. For Detailed Installation Information

3. General

    3.1. openSUSE Documentation
    3.2. Dropped YaST Modules
    3.3. UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface
    3.4. UEFI, GPT, and MS-DOS Partitions
    3.5. Booting When in Secure Boot Mode
    3.6. Adobe Reader (acroread) and Other PDF Readers

4. System Upgrade

    4.1. Upgrading with Zypper (dup) Requires /etc/fstab Cleanup
    4.2. SYSLOG_DAEMON Variable Removed
    4.3. Duplicated Network Interfaces

5. Technical

    5.1. Initializing Graphics with KMS (Kernel Mode Setting)
    5.2. Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver
    5.3. Samba Version 4.1
    5.4. Configuring Postfix
    5.5. xinetd: Logging to the System Log
    5.6. Apache Version 2.4
    5.7. tomcat: Logging to the System Log
    5.8. Darktable: Refreshing Cache Files Needed
    5.9. Locate: Replacing findutils-locate by mlocate
    5.10. KDE and Bluetooth
    5.11. AppArmor and Permission Settings
    5.12. Skype
    5.13. AutoYaST

If you upgrade from an older version to this openSUSE release, see previous
release notes listed here: http://en.opensuse.org/openSUSE:Release_Notes

These release notes cover the following areas:

  o Section 1, "Miscellaneous": These entries are automatically included
    from openFATE, the Feature- and Requirements Management System (http://
    features.opensuse.org).

    N/A

  o Section 2, "Installation": Read this if you want to install the system
    from scratch.

  o Section 3, "General": Information that everybody should read.

  o Section 4, "System Upgrade": Issues related to the process if you run a
    system upgrade from the previous release to this openSUSE version.

  o Section 5, "Technical": This section contains a number of technical
    changes and enhancements for the experienced user.

1. Miscellaneous

N/A

2. Installation

2.1. For Detailed Installation Information

For detailed installation information, see Section 3.1, "openSUSE
Documentation".

3. General

3.1. openSUSE Documentation

In Start-Up, find step-by-step installation instructions, as well as
introductions to the KDE and Gnome desktops and to the LibreOffice suite.
Also covered are basic administration topics such as deployment and
software management and an introduction to the bash shell.

Find the documentation in /usr/share/doc/manual/opensuse-manuals_$LANG
after installing the package opensuse-startup_$LANG, or online on http://
doc.opensuse.org.

3.2. Dropped YaST Modules

The following YaST modules were obsolete and rarely used these days:

  o yast2-autofs

  o yast2-dbus-client

  o yast2-dirinstall

  o yast2-fingerprint-reader

  o yast2-irda

  o yast2-mouse

  o yast2-phone-services

  o yast2-power-management

  o yast2-profile-manager

  o yast2-sshd

  o yast2-tv

The main reason for dropping was to decrease the maintenance effort and
better focus on other more used modules.

3.3. UEFI—Unified Extensible Firmware Interface

Prior to installing openSUSE on a system that boots using UEFI (Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface) you are urgently advised to check for any
firmware updates the hardware vendor recommends and, if available, to
install such an update. A pre-installed Windows 8 is a strong indication
that your system boots using UEFI.

Background: Some UEFI firmware has bugs that cause it to break if too much
data gets written to the UEFI storage area. Nobody really knows how much
"too much" is, though. openSUSE minimizes the risk by not writing more than
the bare minimum required to boot the OS. The minimum means telling the
UEFI firmware about the location of the openSUSE boot loader. Upstream
Linux Kernel features that use the UEFI storage area for storing boot and
crash information (pstore) have been disabled by default. Nevertheless it
is recommended to install any firmware updates the hardware vendor
recommends.

3.4. UEFI, GPT, and MS-DOS Partitions

Together with the EFI/UEFI specification a new style of partitioning
arrived: GPT (GUID Partition Table). This new schema uses globally unique
identifiers (128-bit values displayed in 32 hexadecimal digits) to identify
devices and partition types.

Additionally, the UEFI specification also allows legacy MBR (MS-DOS)
partitions. The Linux boot loaders (ELILO or GRUB2) try to generate
automatically a GUID for those legacy partitions, and write them to the
firmware. Such a GUID can change frequently, causing a rewrite in the
firmware. A rewrite consist of two different operation: removing the old
entry and creating a new entry that replaces the first one.

Modern firmware has a garbage collector that collects deleted entries and
frees the memory reserved for old entries. A problem arises when faulty
firmware does not collect and free those entries; this may end up with a
non-bootable system.

The workaround is simple: convert the legacy MBR partition to the new GPT
to avoid this problem completely.

3.5. Booting When in Secure Boot Mode

This only affects machines in UEFI mode with secure boot enabled.

The new version of the shim loader allows more machines to boot with Secure
Boot enabled than with openSUSE 12.3. Nevertheless, in case of trouble,
first update the BIOS of your machine to the latest version. If the BIOS
update does not help, report the model of your machine it the wiki (http://
en.opensuse.org/openSUSE:UEFI). Then we can track it for the next release.

3.6. Adobe Reader (acroread) and Other PDF Readers

Adobe no longer provides (security) updates for Adobe Reader (acroread).
Therefore the acroread package was dropped from the distribution to protect
openSUSE users.

openSUSE includes various PDF viewing tools like Okular, Evince, and
poppler-tools. These tools are actively maintained and get security fixes
from openSUSE and their upstream authors.

For more information, see http://en.opensuse.org/Adobe_Reader.

4. System Upgrade

4.1. Upgrading with Zypper (dup) Requires /etc/fstab Cleanup

When upgrading with zypper dup (YaST upgrade handles it automatically)
users should remove the following /etc/fstab entries if present:

tmpfs   /dev/shm
devpts  /dev/pts
sysfs   /sys sysfs
proc    /proc proc

This is especially important for Gnome users, otherwise the Gnome terminal
will fail with "grantpt failed: Operation not permitted". These mount
points are managed by systemd and should no longer be present in /etc/
fstab.

4.2. SYSLOG_DAEMON Variable Removed

The SYSLOG_DAEMON variable has been removed. Previously, it was used to
select the syslog daemon. Starting with openSUSE 12.3, only one syslog
implementation can be installed at a time on a system and will be selected
automatically for usage.

For details, see the syslog(8) manpage.

4.3. Duplicated Network Interfaces

The current version of systemd uses a new convention for assigning
predictable names to network interfaces. YaST is changed accordingly.

Some reports indicate a bug in YaST when conversion from one naming scheme
to another takes place. If the same network interface has two different
names, you have been hit by this bug. In this case remove the different
network interfaces in /etc/sysconfig/network and use YaST to configure the
network anew.

For more information about predictable network interface names, see http://
www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd/PredictableNetworkInterfaceNames/
.

5. Technical

5.1. Initializing Graphics with KMS (Kernel Mode Setting)

With openSUSE 11.3 we switched to KMS (Kernel Mode Setting) for Intel, ATI
and NVIDIA graphics, which now is our default. If you encounter problems
with the KMS driver support (intel, radeon, nouveau), disable KMS by adding
nomodeset to the kernel boot command line. To set this permanently using
Grub 2, the default boot loader, add it to the GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT
kernel default load options line in your /etc/default/grub text file as
root and running the terminal command

sudo /usr/sbin/grub2-mkconfig --output=/boot/grub2/grub.cfg

for the changes to take effect. Else, for Grub Legacy, add it to the kernel
command line in /boot/grub/menu.lst, also done as root. This option makes
sure the appropriate kernel module (intel, radeon, nouveau) is loaded with
modeset=0 in initrd, i.e. KMS is disabled.

In the rare cases when loading the DRM module from initrd is a general
problem and unrelated to KMS, it is even possible to disable loading of the
DRM module in initrd completely. For this set the NO_KMS_IN_INITRD
sysconfig variable to yes via YaST, which then recreates initrd afterwards.
Reboot your machine.

On Intel without KMS the Xserver falls back to the fbdev driver (the intel
driver only supports KMS); alternatively, for legacy GPUs from Intel the
"intellegacy" driver (xorg-x11-driver-video-intel-legacy package) is
available, which still supports UMS (User Mode Setting). To use it, edit /
etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/50-device.conf and change the driver entry to
intellegacy.

On ATI for current GPUs it falls back to radeonhd. On NVIDIA without KMS
the nv driver is used (the nouveau driver supports only KMS). Note, newer
ATI and NVIDIA GPUs are falling back to fbdev, if you specify the nomodeset
kernel boot parameter.

5.2. Garbage on the Screen During Installation with the Nouveau Driver

On some systems with NVIDIA cards, the installer may show garbage on the
top part of the screen due to problems with the default nouveau driver. If
you are affected by this problem, you can disable the nouveau kernel module
to run the installer and then enable it again once the system is installed
or upgraded.

To disable the kernel module, once you boot from the installation media,
select the 'Installation' entry in grub and press 'e' to edit the
parameters. Then go to the line starting with 'linux' (or 'linuxefi') and
add brokenmodules=nouveau at the end. Now press F10 to continue booting
with the new parameter. After the system is installed, you can re-enable
the nouveau module by editing /etc/modprobe.d/50-blacklist.conf and
removing the entry that blacklists nouveau.

5.3. Samba Version 4.1

Samba version 4.1 shipped with openSUSE 13.1 does not include support to
operate as an Active Directory style domain controller. This functionality
is currently disabled, as it lacks integration with system-wide MIT
Kerberos.

5.4. Configuring Postfix

With openSUSE 12.3, SuSEconfig.postfix was renamed as /usr/sbin/
config.postfix. If you set sysconfig variables in /etc/sysconfig/postfix or
/etc/sysconfig/mail, you must manually run /usr/sbin/config.postfix as
root.

5.5. xinetd: Logging to the System Log

The new default for xinetd changes the default target for logging from /var
/log/xinetd.log to the system log. This means all messages from xinetd will
appear in a system log as a facility daemon and log level info.

If you want to switch back the the old way, find a proper snippet in /etc/
xinetd.conf. The template for the logrotate script for xinetd.log can be
found in /usr/share/doc/packages/xinetd/logrotate.

5.6. Apache Version 2.4

Apache 2.4 features various changes in the configuration files. For more
information about upgrading from a previous version, see http://
httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/upgrading.html.

5.7. tomcat: Logging to the System Log

The tomcat startup scripts doe no longer write the output to /var/log/
tomcat/catalina.out. All messages are now redirected to the system log via
tomcat.service (tomcat-jsvc.service) and log level info.

5.8. Darktable: Refreshing Cache Files Needed

If upgrading from a previous release to openSUSE 13.1 old cache files may
no longer work. In this case removing ~/.cache/darktable/mipmaps is
necessary.

5.9. Locate: Replacing findutils-locate by mlocate

The mlocate tool is the replacement for findutils-locate. In the default
configuration mlocate behave the same as findutils-locate. Because of an
improved permission handling, it could take up to 24 hours, until the
database file will become available to regular users.

In case you encounter a "Permission denied" message shortly after
installing mlocate, run

/etc/cron.daily/mlocate.cron

as root once.

5.10. KDE and Bluetooth

The Bluetooth stack is provided by Bluez 5 (a major, backwards-incompatbile
version), a necessary upgrade for GNOME desktop and some other components
of the base system. Unfortunately, the KDE workspace only supports Bluez
version 4 in its currently-released versions.

Therefore, the openSUSE KDE community team offers an unofficial Bluedevil
package providing at least basic functionality such as device pairing or
support for bluetooth mice; Some other features are known not to work jet,
like file transfer.

For the moment, bugs should not be filed against Bluetooth support in KDE
as the Bluez 5 port of Bluedevil is still ongoing.

5.11. AppArmor and Permission Settings

AppArmor is enabled by default. This means more security, but might prevent
services from working, if you run them in unexpected ways. If you encounter
strange permission problems, try to switch the AppArmor profile for the
affected service to complain mode with:

aa-complain /usr/bin/$your_service

Complain mode means: allow everything, and log things that the profile
would not allow.

Even if it helps report it as a bug! We want to fix AppArmor profiles to
cover also corner cases.

5.12. Skype

PulseAudio 4.0 exposes a bug in the current version of Skype for Linux
(v4.2). Until Skype is fixed and updated, run skype from the command line:

PULSE_LATENCY_MSEC=60 skype

For more information about this bug, see http://arunraghavan.net/2013/08/
pulseaudio-4-0-and-skype/.

5.13. AutoYaST

If the autoyast profile contains entries in an <add-on> section there is a
bug triggered that prevents information in the profile from being
transferred from the first stage into the second stage. Therefore, in this
case all second stage configuration steps are skipped, which normally leads
to more or less completely unusable installations.

As a temporary workaround, avoid using <add-on> sections in profiles with
AutoYaST in openSUSE 13.1.

